Edits3 (#85)
jhudsl/Computing_for_Cancer_Informatics: 05-Shared_computing_etiquette.Rmd

# Shared Computing Etiquette

> In this chapter we will discuss the proper etiquette for using more traditional shared computing resources, such as an institutional high performance computing cluster server. This will help you to understand what would be required for you to use such resources. Although different resources will have slightly different use rules, however, many resources will share common usage requirements. The following is written based on personal experience, the @doi_rules and the @JHPCE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter we will discuss the proper etiquette for using more traditional shared computing resources, such as an institutional high performance computing cluster server. This will help you to understand what would be required for you to use such resources. Different resources will have slightly different use rules, however, many resources will share common usage requirements. The following is written based on personal experience, the @doi_rules and the @JHPCE.
```

We will use the Johns Hopkins Joint High Performance Computing Exchange (JHPCE) cluster resource as an example to motivate the need for usage rules and proper sharing etiquette for such resources.

> First, let's learn a bit about this JHPCE. For this particular resource, there are about 400 active users. It is optimized for genomic and biomedical research and has 4,000 cores! That's right: as you can imagine, this is much more powerful than the individual laptops and desktops that researchers at the university have for personal use, which would typically only have around 8 cores. The JHPCE also has 28TB of RAM and 14 PB of storage!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's learn a bit about this JHPCE. For this particular resource, there are about 400 active users. It is optimized for genomic and biomedical research and has 4,000 cores! That's right; as you can imagine, this is much more powerful than the individual laptops and desktops that researchers at the university have for personal use, which would currently typically only have around 8 cores. The JHPCE also has 28TB of RAM and 14 PB of storage!
```

Now that you know more about digital sizes, you can appreciate that this server can allow for much faster processing and really large amounts of storage, as again a researchers' computer might have something like 16 GB of RAM and 1TB of storage. 

> Currently, there are 68 nodes that make up the JHPCE currently. As with most clusters, some of the nodes are dedicated to managing user access to the cluster, and some of the nodes are dedicated to transferring data. Each node has 2-4 CPUs that provide 24-128 cores! As you can see, these processors or chips have a lot more cores per each CPU than a typical personal computer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 68 nodes that make up the JHPCE currently. As with most clusters, some of the nodes are dedicated to managing user access to the cluster and some of the nodes are dedicated to transferring data. Each node has 2-4 CPUs that provide 24-128 cores! As you can see, these processors or chips have a lot more cores per each CPU than a typical personal computer. 
```

> Individual users connect and perform jobs (a.k.a. computational tasks) on the cluster using a formal [common pool resource (CPR)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common-pool_resource) hierarchy system. What does this mean? Recall that we are talking about shared resources, where if one user overused the resource, it may be to the detriment of other users' experiences. The CPR hierarchy system is comprised of rules and regulations designed to prevent this from happening, that are enforced by managers of the resource @common-pool_2022. This is important because if a single or a few users used up all the computing resources one day, then the other nearly 400 users would not be able to perform their work that day, which would not be fair. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individual users connect and perform jobs (a.k.a. computational tasks) on the cluster using a formal [common pool resource (CPR)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common-pool_resource) hierarchy system. What does this mean? Recall that we are talking about shared resources, where if one user overuses the resource, it would be to the detriment of other users' experiences. Rules and regulations are designed to prevent this from happening and are enforced by managers of the resource @common-pool_2022. This is important because if a single or a few users used up all the computing resources one day, then the other nearly 400 users would not be able to perform their work that day, which would not be fair. 
```

 
 - Don't share your password and keep it safe!
 

>  If you have a Mac, you could consider storing it in your [Keychain](https://support.apple.com/en-ie/guide/mac-help/mchlf375f392/mac). Alternatively, if you have a different type of computer or don't like the Mac Keychain, consider [Dashlane](https://www.dashlane.com/) or other password manger services. Luckily both of these options do not come at any extra cost and can be helpful for safely storing all the passwords we use regularly safely. These are especially good options if your password is too long or difficult for you to remember. Make sure that you abide by any rules regarding storing passwords that might be required by the resource you intend to use. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 If you have a Mac, you could consider storing it in your [Keychain](https://support.apple.com/en-ie/guide/mac-help/mchlf375f392/mac). Alternatively, if you have a different type of computer or don't like the Mac Keychain, consider [Dashlane](https://www.dashlane.com/) or other password manger services. Luckily the  Mac Keychain does not come at any extra cost and can be helpful for safely storing all the passwords we use regularly safely. These are especially good options if your password is too long or difficult for you to remember. Make sure that you abide by any rules regarding storing passwords that might be required by the resource you intend to use. 
```

 
 - Think about memory allocation and efficiency.
 
Consider how much RAM and storage is available for people on the shared computing resource. Try not to overload the resource with a very intensive job! Jobs that use most of the resources may either slow down the efficiency of the work for others or not allow them to perform their work at all.

Specifically, the etiquette regarding memory allocation includes:

   * Not using too many nodes if you don't need to
   * Not using too much RAM on a given node or overall if you don't need to
   * Not submitting too many jobs at once
   * Communicating with others to give them advanced warning if you are going to submit large or intensive jobs
   
If you have a really large job that you need to perform, talk with the managers of the resource so that you can work out a time when perhaps fewer users would be inconvenienced. Consult the guidelines for your particular resource about how one lets people know about large jobs before you email the administrators of the resource directly. Often there are communications systems in place for users to let each other know about large jobs.

> The illustration below depicts how timing can affect the user experience in using a shared resource. If many people are using the same resource at the same time, especially using up the resources with a heavy task, it might slow down other users, or hinder them from performing their jobs fully. It might be a good idea to target a timeframe when you know might be less crowded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The illustration below depicts how timing can affect the user experience in using a shared resource. If many people are using the same resource at the same time, especially using up the resources with a heavy task, it might slow down other users, or hinder them from performing their jobs fully. It might be a good idea to target a timeframe when you know the resource might be less crowded.
```

### Specifying memory (RAM) needs

Often there is a default file size limit for jobs. For example, the JHPCE has a 10GB file size limit for jobs. When you have a job using a file that exceeds that limit, you may need to specify and set the file size accordingly for that job. As you may recall, if you are using whole genome files you are likely to exceed the default file limit size. 

In addition to the file size limit, you are often also given a default amount of RAM for your job as well. Again, you can typically run a job with more RAM if you specify. Similar to the file size limit, you will likely need to set the RAM that you will need for your job if it is above the default limit. This involves setting a lower and upper limit to the RAM that your job can use. If your job exceeds that amount of RAM it will be stopped. Typically people call stopping a job "killing" it. The lower and upper limit can be the same number.

> How do you know how much RAM to assign to your job? Well, if you are performing a job with files that are two times the size of the file size default limit, then it might make sense to double the RAM you would typically use. It's also a good idea to test on one file first if you are going to perform the same job on multiple files. You can then assess how much RAM the job used. First, try to perform the job with lower limits, then progressively increase the size until you see that the job was successful and not killed for exceeding the limit. Keep in mind, however, how much RAM there is on each node. Remember, it is important not to ask for all the RAM on a single node or core on that node, as this will result in you hogging that node and other users will not be able to use RAM on that node or core on that node. Remember that you will likely have the option to use multiple cores. This can also help you to use less RAM across each core. For example, a job that needs 120GB of RAM could use 10 cores with 12 GB of RAM each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do you know how much RAM to assign to your job? Well, if you are performing a job with files that are two times the size of the file size default limit, then it might make sense to double the RAM you would typically use. **It's also a good idea to test on one file first if you are going to perform the same job on multiple files.** You can then assess how much RAM the job used. First, try to perform the job with lower limits, then progressively increase the size until you see that the job was successful and not killed for exceeding the limit. Keep in mind, however, how much RAM there is on each node. Remember, it is important not to ask for all the RAM on a single node or core on that node, as this will result in you hogging that node and other users will not be able to use RAM on that node or core on that node. Remember that you will likely have the option to use multiple cores. This can also help you to use less RAM across each core. For example, a job that needs 120GB of RAM could use 10 cores with 12 GB of RAM each.
```

> Often there will be a limit for the number of jobs, the amount of RAM, and the number of cores that a single user can use beyond the default limits. This is to ensure that a user doesn't use too many resources causing others to not be able to perform their jobs. Check to see what these limits are, and then figure out what the appropriate way is to contact to request for more. Again, communication standards and workflows may vary based on the resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often there will be a limit for the number of jobs, the amount of RAM, and the number of cores that a single user can use beyond the default limits. This is to ensure that a user doesn't use too many resources causing others to not be able to perform their jobs. Check to see what these limits are, and then determine the appropriate way to contact to request for more. Again, communication standards and workflows may vary based on the resource.
```

### Checking status

It's also a good idea to check the status of your jobs to see if they worked or got killed. You can check for the expected file outputs or there are commands for the server management software that can help you check currently running jobs.

## Storage

Often you will be given a home directory which will likely be backed up. However, other storage directories often will not be. Be careful about where you store your data, as some directories might be for temporary use and get wiped to keep space available for others.

## Conclusion

> We hope that this chapter has given you some more knowledge about why and how computing resources are shared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope that this chapter has given you some more knowledge about why and how more traditional shared computing resources are shared.
```
